# Codesai website

Jekyll based website for Codesai


# Setup

## Docker

1. Clone the repository
2. Navigate to the repository folder in a terminal
3. Run `docker-compose up`
4. You may access the local website at `localhost:4000`
5. Start coding and jekyll will automatically build after you save changes
6. If you modify `.yml` files, you need to either restart the docker container (`Ctrl+C, docker-compose up` again) or start another terminal and type `docker exec -it {name} bash` to get a terminal inside the container. Once there, type `jekyll build` so it will build the site taking the changes to the `.yml` files. This is because the docker container is executing `jekyll serve` which doesn't get the `.yml` changes.

**Remember:** If you experience other problems with jekyll automatic builds you can always start another terminal and run `docker exec -it {name} bash`. You may now use `jekyll build` and other jekyll commands on demand.
To check the name of your docker container you can run `docker ps`, it should be something like {name_of_jekyll_folder}_web_1.

### How it works

We are using native Docker, [check how to install it on different operating systems](https://docs.docker.com/engine/getstarted/step_one/#step-1-get-docker). If you are looking for a quick introduction to Docker be sure to follow the Getting Started documentation for your OS, it's pretty good.

Once everything is setup in your machine, notice the `docker-compose.yml` file in the root of the repository folder. This file is used to execute the docker container with the official jekyll image when typing the `docker-compose up` command in the terminal. With the docker compose file we avoid having to type the full command everytime we want to execute the container. It can also be used to execute multiple containers at once, but we're not going to such lengths.

Reading through the docker compose file, we have a web service executing the jekyll/jekyll:pages official image, accessed through the localhost:4000 port (jekyll's default). The port is mapped, you can change it if you want to. The volume shared to the docker container is the current one (the `.` is mapped to `/srv/jekyll`, the internal container folder where our site is located).

Finally, the command being executed is `jekyll serve --force_polling --config=_config.yml,_local_config.yml` located inside the `/scripts/development_build.sh` file. This command watches for changes to rebuild the site. `--force_polling` is needed for the watcher to work on Windows. `--config` is set to the `_config.yml` and overriden by the `_local_config.yml`, which means the values for the duplicated keys in the local config will take precedence.


## Your own environment

1. Clone the repository
2. Install ruby
3. Navigate to the repository folder in a terminal.
4. Run `bundle install`
5. Run `jekyll build`
6. Run `jekyll serve`, if on windows run `jekyll serve --force_polling` instead
7. You may access the local website at `localhost:4000`
8. Start coding and jekyll will automatically build after you save changes

If you experience problems with jekyll automatic builds you can start another terminal, navigate to the repository folder and run `jekyll build` on demand.

## To build a version for production
Run the build_for_production.sh script. 

This script runs jekyll build setting jekyll's `JEKYLL_ENV` environment variable to `production` (by default it's set to `development`). 

This way the Google Analytics tracking code is only rendered for the production version and we prevent that visits from localhost:4000 mess up our analytics.

## Jekyll Concepts

### Workflow

When running `jekyll build`, the content is autogenerated in the `_site` folder. This is the folder that is deployed and accessed by the browser.
We use `jekyll serve` to automatically execute the build after we save changes and allow access to the site at `localhost:4000`. If on windows, use `jekyll serve --force_polling`. This is to compensate for the `--watch` option not working on windows, and it is applied by default.

Having the `jekyll serve` running, we can save changes and refresh the page to see the changes. However, there is an issue:

- When saving changes to .yml files, llike `_config.yml`, we should restart the `jekyll serve` to see changes. Or stop the docker container with `Ctrl+C` and execute `docker-compose up` again.

### Plugins

We are using the `jekyll-multiple-languages-plugin` to generate the english version of the site at `_site/en/`. The content is duplicated inside the folder but with the language set to english.

- To allow for translations, we have a `_i18n` folder with an .yml file for each language, following the two-letter convention. In this case: `es.yml` and `en.yml`.
- The spansih is the default language build at the root of `_site`.
- To translate content, we use the liquid tag provided by the plugin: `{% translate my.content %}`. This would check the language .yml files and look for the value for `my.content`.

### Layouts and includes

The layouts in the `_layouts` and the includes in the `_includes` folder may save use time and remove html duplication. It is usually used for the head, header and footer for convenience.

- We must have specified a layout in an .html file for liquid to evaluate it.


## Website

- The styles are in the `airspace.css` file and it will be renamed and refactored once we have everything in place and the theme has become obsolete.
- The styles for the `@media` queries are in the `responsive.css` file. It should also be cleaned up like the previous one.
- We use the bootstrap breakpoints:
    1. Extra small devices (xs): `768px` This is the **default** (mobile first)
    2. Small devices (sm): `768px ... 991px`
    3. Medium devices (md): `992px ... 1199px`
    4. Large devices (lg): `1200px`
